# network-_traffic_classification
A simple network topology was created using VirtualBox as shown in Figure 1. It consisted of 5 Virtual 
Machines: 1 Controller, 1 Layer 2 Switch, and 3 Hosts. The nodes in the network were modeled as VMs 
so that network traffic would experience some delay. Another option was to use Mininet but it wasn’t 
chosen due to the network simulation taking place within a single VM. An overlay network was deployed 
so that the traffic generated by the hosts went through the Switch VM instead of using the VirtualBox 
internal switching mechanism to communicate. The hosts in the network used OVS with 2 interfaces. 
The first interface was internal and the second connected towards the Switch VM OVS using VXLAN 
tunnelling. The Switch OVS had VXLAN interfaces towards the hosts and connected to the Controller VM 
directly (i.e. using underlay IP). The Ryu controller was deployed on the Controller VM. 

After the network is successfully deployed and configured, the controller should be aware of packets 
flowing through the switch between any of the hosts. The sample Python script, simple_monitor_13.py.

Simulating Traffic Flows 
The Distributed Internet Traffic Generator (D-ITG) application was used to generate the traffic flow data 
used for training the Machine Learning models. D-ITG is described as ‘a platform capable to produce 
IPv4 and IPv6 traffic by accurately replicating the workload of current Internet applications. D-ITG can 
generate traffic following stochastic models for packet size (PS) and inter departure time (IDT) that 
mimic application-level protocol behavior. D-ITG is able to replicate statistical properties of traffic of different well-known applications (e.g. Telnet, VoIP – G.711, G.723, G.729, Voice Activity Detection, 
Compressed RTP – DNS, network games’ [1]. For the purposes of this proof of concept traffic 
classification, the following traffic types were used: Ping, Telnet, DNS, Voice (G.711). The choice of traffic 
classes was due to limitations in simulation tools and issues faced in using D-ITG as discussed further in 
the Limitations and Future Work section.   

For Ping traffic, a simple ‘ping’ command was run with the overlay IP of the destination host.  
The process to collect training data for the models is as follows: First simulate the flow of the specific 
traffic between a certain pair of hosts using D-ITG or other tools. Second, start the traffic_classifier.py 
script with the appropriate options for training the traffic type. The script starts the Ryu controller and 
simple_monitor_AK.py (the modified version of simple_monitor_13.py). The data generated from 
simple monitor script is collected and transformed to update the attributes of a Flow object. The 
attributes of the Flow object are then periodically outputted to a CSV file. After the CSV files for each 
traffic type are generated, they are combined in a complete Pandas Dataframe object used for the 
model training and testing. 
